MAGECLOUD-4894: [MTS] Add support of split DB on docker (#6852)
magento/devdocs: src/cloud/docker/docker-split-db.md

---
group: cloud-guide

> title: Configure Split Databases for Docker

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Configure Magento split databases for Docker
```

functional_areas:
- Cloud
- Setup
- Configuration
- Debug
- Split Databases
---

## Configure Split Databases for Docker
To prepare the configuration before deploying the split db architecture, you will need to modify several files:

1. Add the next database services to the config file `.magento/services.yaml`:

```yaml
 ...
mysql-quote:
    type: mysql:10.2
    disk: 512
mysql-sales:
    type: mysql:10.2
    disk: 512
 ...
```

4. Add the next relationships to the config file `.magento.app.yaml`:

```yaml
relationships:
    ...
    database-quote: "mysql-quote:mysql"
    database-sales: "mysql-sales:mysql"
   ...
```

> 5. Let's now generate the file by running the cli command:

Author: ```suggestion
5. Generate the Docker Compose configuration file for
```
That should be enough

```bash
php vendor/bin/ece-docker build:compose
```
NOTES: As with the 'db' container, you can use the options to set the ports to forward to your local environment:
  

> ```shell script

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```bash
```

php vendor/bin/ece-docker build:compose --expose-db-quote-port=<port for quotee db service> --expose-db-sales-port=<port for sales db service>
```

6. Аfter generation, open the file `./docker-compose.yml` and you will see that the configuration for database services has been added:

> ```shell script

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```bash
```

$ cat  ./docker-compose.yml
...
services:
  ...
  db-quote:
    hostname: db-quote.magento2.docker
    image: 'mariadb:10.2'
    environment:
      - MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD=magento2
      - MYSQL_DATABASE=magento2
      - MYSQL_USER=magento2
      - MYSQL_PASSWORD=magento2
    ports:
      - '3306'
    volumes:
      - 'magento-db-quote:/var/lib/mysql'
      - 'docker-entrypoint-quote:/docker-entrypoint-initdb.d'
      - 'mariadb-conf:/etc/mysql/mariadb.conf.d'
      - 'docker-mnt:/mnt:delegated'
    networks:
      magento:
        aliases:
          - db-quote.magento2.docker
  db-sales:
    hostname: db-sales.magento2.docker
    image: 'mariadb:10.2'
    environment:
      - MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD=magento2
      - MYSQL_DATABASE=magento2
      - MYSQL_USER=magento2
      - MYSQL_PASSWORD=magento2
    ports:
      - '3306'
    volumes:
      - 'magento-db-sales:/var/lib/mysql'
      - 'docker-entrypoint-sales:/docker-entrypoint-initdb.d'
      - 'mariadb-conf:/etc/mysql/mariadb.conf.d'
      - 'docker-mnt:/mnt:delegated'
    networks:
      magento:
        aliases:
          - db-sales.magento2.docker
...
```
     

> 6. The file `./.docker/config.php.dist` was generated with next configurations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6.  Verify that the `./.docker/config.php.dist`  environment configuration file includes the updated database service configuration:
```

Reviewer: Should the filename be  `./.docker/config.php`

```php
<?php

return [
    'MAGENTO_CLOUD_RELATIONSHIPS' => base64_encode(json_encode([
       //...
        'database-sales' => [
            [
                'host' => 'db-sales',
                'path' => 'magento2',
                'password' => 'magento2',
                'username' => 'magento2',
                'port' => '3306'
            ]
        ],
        'database-quote' => [
            [
                'host' => 'db-quote',
                'path' => 'magento2',
                'password' => 'magento2',
                'username' => 'magento2',
                'port' => '3306'
            ]
        ],
    ])),
   //...
];
```

> 7. Run 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7.  Using the updated configuration, build files to containers and run in the background.
```

> ```shell script

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```bash
```

docker-compose up -d
```

> 8. Run command 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
8. Install Magento in your Docker environment.
```

Author: It is not an installation command. I will fix with next commit

> ```shell script

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```bash
```

docker-compose run deploy bash
```

> 

Reviewer: I don't think that you need the rest of the steps in this topic.

Instead, after step 8 have an ending sentence that says something like: 

After deploying Magento with the split DB configuration, use the database credentials and port information to manage each database. See [Manage the database]({{site.baseurl}}/cloud/docker/docker-manage-database.html.

On the Manage database topic, you could update the sections "Connect to a database" and  "to connect to the database port" to include the split db example.

Author: Done

      {
         "host" : "db-quote",
         "port" : "3306",
         "path" : "magento2",
         "username" : "magento2",
         "password" : "magento2"
      }
   ],
   "database-sales" : [
      {
         "path" : "magento2",
         "port" : "3306",
         "username" : "magento2",
         "host" : "db-sales",
         "password" : "magento2"
      }
   ]
}
 ```

10. Yuo can use this credentials to connect to DB services
11. Exit from container and run `docker-compose ps`:

```shell script
docker-compose ps
            Name                           Command                  State                Ports
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
...
magento-cloud_db-quote_1        docker-entrypoint.sh mysqld      Up             0.0.0.0:32873->3306/tcp
magento-cloud_db-sales_1        docker-entrypoint.sh mysqld      Up             0.0.0.0:32874->3306/tcp
magento-cloud_db_1              docker-entrypoint.sh mysqld      Up             0.0.0.0:32872->3306/tcp
...
```

12. Yuo can use this ports to connect to DB services from your host
 
Now everything is ready to install Magento with Split Databases

>    ![Xdebug Helper options]({{ site.baseurl }}/common/images/cloud-xdebug_helper-options.png){:width="400px"}

Reviewer: Not sure why this image is here.  Maybe you can remove it. Or if you need it for something, add a sentence to explain why it is here.

Author: Fixed

> [docker-config]: {{site.baseurl}}/cloud/docker/docker-config.html

Reviewer: This link is not referenced in the topic. You can remove, or if you need it add the reference to the topic text where it's needed.

Author: fixed

> [Xdebug Helper extension]: https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/xdebug-helper/eadndfjplgieldjbigjakmdgkmoaaaoc?hl=en

Reviewer: Do you need the Xdebug Helper extension link?
